---
title: Update from 0.5 to 0.6
subtitle: Released on 27th August 2016
target_version: 0.6.0.0
---

<%= warning_box_start("warning") %>
This update will take a bit longer since it includes a couple of potentially long running migrations, especially for bigger databases.
<%= warning_box_end %>

1. First, make sure you stop your diaspora* pod before proceeding to update your installation.
1. Backup your database, run the following steps in a screen or tmux session so they can't be interrupted when for example your SSH connection drops. Run all commands from within your diaspora* installation path.
1. Update RVM with `rvm get latest` and install Ruby 2.3 with `rvm install 2.3`. Ruby 2.0 is no longer supported and Ruby 2.2 is not officially supported but may work. Ruby 2.1 however is supported.
1. Stop diaspora* now, it can't be running during the update or else the migrations will fail.
1. With the old Ruby 2.1 still activated, run `RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec sidekiq` (add `DB=postgres` to the command if you're a PostgreSQL user), wait 5 minutes and take it down again with `Ctrl+C`.
1. Ensure to activate the new Ruby with `rvm use 2.3`.
1. Install the latest Bundler version with `gem install bundler --version 1.15.4`.
1. Update diaspora* by running `git checkout Gemfile.lock db/schema.rb` and `git pull; git checkout v0.6.7.0`.
1. The `DB` environment variable is gone, instead now we need to tell Bundler which database support to install. Run `bin/bundle install --full-index --with mysql --deployment` for MySQL support, run `bin/bundle install --full-index --with postgresql --deployment` for PostgreSQL support. Bundler remembers this choice and you won't have to specify it again. Ignore any migration notes this command gives you, they're already done for you.
1. Update the database with `RAILS_ENV=production bin/rake db:migrate`. This will take some time, be patient.
1. After or while the database is updating, review some of the new configuration defaults. The most important change is that the application server no longer listens to port 3000 by default, instead it now listens to a UNIX socket at `tmp/diaspora.sock`. You should either update your reverse proxy configuration to use the socket, or update `config/diaspora.yml` and explicitly configure it to listen to port 3000. You can find a summary of other important changes below.
1. When the database was successfully updated, update the assets with: `RAILS_ENV=production bin/rake tmp:cache:clear assets:precompile`.
1. Next you can start diaspora* again. Don't forget to adjust the Ruby version in any startup scripts you may have.
1. Finally you need to migrate any jobs from legacy Sidekiq queues to the new ones, to do this run `RAILS_ENV=production bin/rake migrations:legacy_queues`.

You should now compare your `config/diaspora.yml` to the updated `config/diaspora.yml.example`, for example with `vimdiff`. Notable changes, not only limited to the configuration, are:

- We dropped support for Redis namespaces in this release. If you previously set a custom namespace, please note that diaspora* will no longer use the configured value. By default, Redis supports up to 8 databases which can be selected via the Redis URL in `config/diaspora.yml`. Please check the examples provided in our configuration example file.
- diaspora* 0.5 introduced an experimental chat feature by making use of Vines. Due to many issues with Vines, we decided to remove it and offer a Prosody example configuration instead. Check [[Integration/Chat]] for more information on how to migrate to Prosody if you've been using Vines before. Unfortunately the feature still is experimental and we recommend careful consideration before you enable it.
- With the port to Bootstrap 3, `app/views/terms/default.haml` has a new structure. If you have created a customised `app/views/terms/terms.haml` or `app/views/terms/terms.erb` file, you will need to edit those files to base your customisations on the new `default.haml` file.

Have a look at the [changelog][changelog] for the full list of changes.

[changelog]: https://github.com/diaspora/diaspora/blob/master/Changelog.md
