---
title: Update from 0.6 to 0.7
subtitle: Released on 19th August 2017
target_version: 0.7.0.0
---

<%= warning_box_start("info") %>
If, and only if, you were testing the release candidate, skip this guide, run `git checkout master && git pull` and proceed with the minor release update instructions above.
<%= warning_box_end %>

1. Backup your database, run the following steps in a screen or tmux session so they can't be interrupted when for example your SSH connection drops. Run all commands from within your diaspora* installation path.
1. Update RVM with `rvm get latest` and install Ruby 2.4 with `rvm install 2.4`. Ruby 2.1 and Ruby 2.2 are no longer supported. Ruby 2.3 however is supported.
1. Stop diaspora* now, it can't be running during the update or else the migrations will fail.
1. Update diaspora* by running `git checkout db/schema.rb` and `git pull; git checkout master`.
1. Run `git status` and delete all "Untracked files", especially make sure to delete `public/.well-known/host-meta`, since it will prevent the federation from working properly.
1. Activate the new Ruby with `cd .. && cd -`.
1. Install the latest Bundler version with `gem install bundler`.
1. Sometimes the bundler config is broken, so run `script/configure_bundler` to ensure it's correct.
1. Install the dependencies with `bin/bundle`. CAREFUL: Do not run any commands that are suggested at the end of the terminal output; that was already done for you.
1. Update the database with `RAILS_ENV=production bin/rake db:migrate`.
1. When the database was successfully updated, update the assets with: `RAILS_ENV=production bin/rake tmp:cache:clear assets:precompile`.
1. Next you can start diaspora* again. Don't forget to adjust the Ruby version in any startup scripts you may have.

You should now compare your `config/diaspora.yml` to the updated `config/diaspora.yml.example`, for example with `vimdiff`.

Have a look at the [changelog][changelog] for the full list of changes.

[changelog]: https://github.com/diaspora/diaspora/blob/ecd4601bacd8b2e235a05ce6d713fe8cebe89562/Changelog.md
